In software engineering, a software development methodology also known as
a system development methodology, software development life cycle, software
development process, software process is a splitting of software development
work into distinct phases or stages containing activities with the intent
of better planning and management. It is often considered a subset of the
systems development life cycle. The methodology may include the
pre-definition of specific deliverables and artifacts that are created and
completed by a project team to develop or maintain an application. Common
methodologies include waterfall, prototyping, iterative and incremental
development, spiral development, rapid application development, extreme
programming and various types of agile methodology. Some people consider a
life-cycle model a more general term for a category of methodologies and a
software development process a more specific term to refer to a specific
process chosen by a specific organization. For example, there are many
specific software development processes that fit the spiral life-cycle
model. A variety of such frameworks have evolved over the years, each with
its own recognized strengths and weaknesses.
One software development methodology framework is not necessarily suitable
for use by all projects. Each of the available methodology frameworks are
best suited to specific kinds of projects, based on various technical,
organizational, project and team considerations.
Software development organizations implement process methodologies to ease
the process of development. Sometimes, contractors may require methodologies
employed, an example is the U.S. defense industry, which requires a rating
based on process models to obtain contracts. The international standard for
describing the method of selecting, implementing and monitoring the life
cycle for software is certified. A decades-long goal has been to find
repeatable, predictable processes that improve productivity and quality.
Some try to systematize or formalize the seemingly unruly task of designing
software. Others apply project management techniques to designing software.
Without effective project management, software projects can easily be
delivered late or over budget. With large numbers of software projects not
meeting their expectations in terms of functionality, cost, or delivery
schedule, it is effective project management that appears to be lacking.
Organizations may create a Software Engineering Process Group SEPG, which
is the focal point for process improvement. Composed of line practitioners
who have varied skills, the group is at the center of the collaborative
effort of everyone in the organization who is involved with software
engineering process improvement. A particular development team may also
agree to programming environment details, such as which integrated
development environment is used, and one or more dominant programming
paradigms, programming style rules, or choice of specific software libraries
or software frameworks. These details are generally not dictated by the
choice of model or general methodology. History. The software development
methodology also known as SDM framework didn't emerge until the sixties.
According to Elliott 2004 the systems development life cycle SDLC can be
considered to be the oldest formalized methodology framework for building
information systems. The main idea of the SDLC has been to pursue the
development of information systems in a very deliberate, structured and
methodical way, requiring each stage of the life cycle from inception of
the idea to delivery of the final system to be carried out rigidly and
sequentially within the context of the framework being applied. The
main target of this methodology framework in the sixties was to develop
large scale functional business systems in an age of large scale business
conglomerates. Information systems activities revolved around heavy data
processing and number crunching routines.
Methodologies, processes, and frameworks range from specific proscriptive
steps that can be used directly by an organization in day-to-day work, to
flexible frameworks that an organization uses to generate a custom set of
steps tailored to the needs of a specific project or group. In some cases a
sponsor or maintenance organization distributes an official set of
documents that describe the process.
Several software development approaches have been used since the origin of
information technology, in two main categories. Typically an approach or a
combination of approaches is chosen by management or a development team.
Traditional methodologies such as waterfall that have distinct phases are
sometimes known as software development life cycle SDLC methodologies,
though this term could also be used more generally to refer to any
methodology. A project could last for years and years, or you could zip
right through. You plan for the worst. A life cycle approach with distinct
phases is in contrast to Agile approaches which define a process of
iteration, but where design, construction, and deployment of different
pieces can occur simultaneously.
